# Research design and analytical framework

## What is the goal of archaeology?

Should the goal of archaeological research. This question might first appear hopelessly abstract and irrelevant  [@arponen2019, 2]. While arguments against this has been made, there does not appear to be any good alternatives to see the main goal of research as truth, where truth is defined by what is the case. The concept of truth, and whether it can or should instead be conceived of as for example what we believe, what is the best for us, or a pointless concept altogether, all inevitably appear to lead. That nothing is true is perhaps difficult to disprove, but is entirely untenable  Dismantling of the entire scientific enterprise and. To say that truth has to be the ultimate goal does not  

## Merits of a model-based archaeology

## Chronology, archaeological cultures and modifiable analytical units

The study area of this thesis, as situated firmly within south-eastern Norway, is for the most part believed to have followed the same unified trajectory in terms of overall cultural historical developments and expressions of material culture through the Mesolithic. At least within the analytical detection limit that has characterised the field thus far. What has been of greater concern is the temporal transition between the occurrence of diagnostic elements within this region. In Norwegian Mesolithic research more widely, the question of both regional variation in material culture and its timing has led to discussions of whether a concept known as \'chronozones\' has any merit as a framework for systematising the archaeological material. While this is a concept that has remained marginal in archaeology in general, and is mainly used by some practitioners in Norwegian Stone Age archaeology, it is related to fundamental issues faced within archaeology as a whole.

The concept originates in a paper by @bjerck1986, in which he attempts to tackle the distinction between the archaeologically defined cultures of Fosna and Nøstvet in. Instead of an ever continued nuancing of these terms as more variation and idiosyncrasies are encountered in the archaeological record, @bjerck1986[72--73] instead suggests a division of the Mesolithic period into a series of 500-year time intervals denoted 'chronozones', which he argues could facilitate a Pan-Scandinavian framework for approaching the Mesolithic [@bjerck2008, 72--73]. The concept of chronozones is taken from geology, where the term is used to denote stratigraphic layers that formed over the same specific time-span on a regional or world-wide scale, known from geochronological terms such as.  Bjerck's motivation for adapting this to archaeology is to form a framework that is neutral with respect to cultural variation across space and time. He argues that traditional archaeological units of analysis, typically denoted by terms such as cultures or techno-complexes that are discretely delineated in time and space, has led to an artificial partitioning of the archaeological material that is less open to gradual temporal change and spatial variation -- an issue that has been recognised by many archaeologists through the years, including @childe1956[]. Bjerck argues that the use of neutral 500-year time-intervals will reduce the degree to which analyses will overemphasise homogeneity within, and exaggerate differences between such analytical units. To further illustrate the issues Bjerck attempted to tackle, it is useful with a detour via the concepts of the Modifiable Areal Unit Problem (MAUP), as taken from the field of geography [e.g. @harris2006], and its recently coined temporal equivalent, the Modifiable Temporal Unit Problem (MTUP, @bevan2021).

Focusing first on the temporal dimension, @bevan2021 have recently given a demonstration of how archaeological periodisation involving lumping and splitting of phenomena within more or less arbitrary disjoint time-intervals have analytical consequences that remain under-appreciated within archaeology. First, employing strict cut-offs between temporal units -- units that often also vary in their duration -- has major implications for comparison between these units, and can, as @bjerck[2008] also notes, lead to an artificial overemphasis of the transition between these. 

Furthermore, building on [@crema], @bevan2021 also present issues related to what they term. 

A final issue pertains to what has been termed duration effects. When 

While perhaps not originally the intention for the use of chronozones, studies that have used the concept have in practice typically first found point-estimates of dates before ascribing the archaeological phenomena to one of these 500-year intervals. Consequently, this approach does not take the uncertainty inherent to the dates, nor the concept of duration properly into account, and thus further exaggerate the impact of the artificial 500-year time units.  Furthermore, while a neutral reference frame will be useful for disentangling an analysis from erroneous typological frameworks, the concept of chronozones would also throw the invaluable temporal information from typological indicators out with the proverbial bathwater. Temporal lumping 

While the concept of chronozones thus might have once been useful for disentangling our analytical framework from a typo-chronology not fit for purpose, the use of artificial 500-year intervals introduces its own set of problematic analytical consequences, and has in my mind largely outplayed its usefulness.

While the issues with MTUP are closely related to those of MAUP, the nature and dimensionality of spatial data means that the MAUP is initially approached as a seperate issue.  


While neither the MAUP nor the MTUP have any clear solutions, and the magnitude of their impact will depend on the given research question and accompanying analytical scale, their formulation arguably form a better frame for understanding these issues than the concept of chronozones. I believe chronozones can instead obfuscate the distinction between the temporal and the spatial scale, and that it can lead to a conflation of typology -- understood in its widest possible sense -- as a methodology for systematising archaeological material and as a dating method. As @bjerck states, typology obviously has its place as both a culturally and temporally responsive framework. Chronozones, on the other hand, are supposed to make comparisons across typologically inferred boundaries in space and time tractable. In her comment to Bjerck's paper, @skar1987[35] notes that geological chronozones couple pan-regional stratigraphic layers with the calendar scale, but that there is no equivalent pan-regional archaeological phenomena that equally consistently correspond to a section of the calendar scale. As @bjerck1987[40] further underscores in his response, archaeological chronozones are therefore not, unlike typological frameworks, meant to be culturally responsive, but are to represent a neutral temporal scale of 500-year intervals. However, as @østmo1987 and @mikkelsen1987 note in their comments to the paper, this purpose is already fulfilled by the calendar scale. If the stratigraphic information related to a specific time-interval is removed from the geological chronozone, only chrono remains. Similarly, if the archaeological chronozone is not meant to hold any culturally responsive component, only the time scale remains. As a culturally independent scale, the calendar scale will always be preferable to the that of chronozones, not only because it is firmly established, but also because it allows for more variation in the temporal resolution associated with different phenomena to be systematised, and allows for their duration or uncertainty of occurrence to span a wider range of aggregative time-units.

In replying to this critique, @bjerck1987[40] states that questioning the need of chronozones when we already have the calendar is like asking 'Do we need the term "month" when we have numbered days?'. If one accept this, and disregards the term quincentennial, then the question becomes if the terminology used with chronozones is better than simply stating what 500-year intervals we are dealing with. For example, @bjerck2008 uses the division into the chronozones Middle Mesolithic (MM) 1 (8000--7500 BCE), MM2 (7500--7000 BCE) and MM3 (7000--6500). A reader coming across \'MM3\' instead of \'7000-6500 BCE\' therefore has to keep in mind that this simply refers to this specific time-interval and be aware that the term Middle Mesolithic should be entirely disregarded, as it is in this use meant to be devoid of any cultural meaning. One could perhaps change terminology to something that doesn't have as many cultural and research historical connotations as 'Middle Mesolithic', but this strikes me as altogether unnecessary exercise, solved by only referring to the calendar scale in the first place. If one wants to use a 500-year interval time-scale it would in my mind be better to simply define this independently of the now inflated discussion of chronozones, not least because I believe the use of the term can lead to unnecessary confusion -- if not for practitioners, then likely for readers.

In their comments to the original paper by @bjerck1986, @østmo1987 and @mikkelsen1987 deem chronozones an unnecessary and complicating concept. Commenting on these critiques, @nyland2016[] states that both of the authors make their comments in light of typological frameworks for Mesolithic south-eastern Norway, but that neither address the issue of the geographical coverage that these have. However, I believe this is first and foremost an empirical issue rather than something to be solved by new terminology and not by the chronozone, which is a concept mean to be culturally unresponsive. Drawing on an example given by @nyland2016[]; if the question is if central Norway falls within the same cultural sphere as south-eastern Norway, understood to be determined by comparable material culture, then this is dependent on two dimensions, if one disregards the problem of the initial delineation of these two regions. The first is an evaluation of the degree to which characteristics of archaeological material in the two regions is considered to be similar, according some criteria. The second pertains to the timing of the occurrence of this material. To establish this necessarily demands temporal data that is independent of the typological framework itself, or possibly by reference to some principle of seriation with the uncertainty that this entails. If some artefact type occurs in both central Norway and south-eastern Norway, this could lead one to conclude that a similar kind of cultural expression is common to the two regions. If independent temporal data associated with this material, such as radiocarbon dates, additionally indicates that there is a temporal synchroneity between their occurrence, then this would lead one to conclude that this cultural expression appears to occur simultaneously in the two regions -- within some level of temporal certainty. Depending on the magnitude of artefactual and temporal evidence for this coincidence, this could then lead one to apply this typological framework as a dating method in the case that one excavates a site in either region and discover material of the type in question. A continuous adjustment and evaluation of the reliability of the identified cultural affinity and the derived typological dating frame will of course be necessary, but will have to be founded on material culture and the position of their occurrence on the calendar scale. This also pertains to the co-occurrence of various archaeological evidence and their wider cultural implications, for example whether or not some artefact type tends to be associated with agricultural activity. If either region lack artefactual or temporal data, then either the nature or the timing of cultural affinity cannot be resolved. The concept of chronozones cannot overcome these issues, and, I think, is more likely to confuse them. 

In conclusion, I therefore agree with @østmo1987 and @mikkelsen1987 in that the concept of chronozones represents an unnecessary complication. Although some of these complications follow from misunderstandings of the original proposition [@bjerck], it appears to sometimes lead to the muddling of several cultural, spatial and temporal issues that are best handled by reference to already well-established terminology, and by the use of modern methods that allows for the formal definition and handling of fuzzy and uncertain categorisation in the aggregation of data, both on the scale of material culture, time and space [e.g. @crema2012; @fusco2020; @shennan2015]. If it is meant to be a purely chronological reference frame, then the calendar scale already allows us to aggregate data in 500-year intervals and reference these as such. The amount of ink now spent discussing chronozones also means that invoking the term carries with it the necessity to clarify how one intends to use it, which can be circumvented by avoiding the term altogether. Furthermore, as a term suggested for use in Pan-Scandinavian Mesolithic research, I believe this idiosyncratic concept will also unnecessarily divorce the field from discussions of the same issues within archaeology more widely, while also making the field less accessible to outsiders and more difficult to couple with adjacent disciplines. It is therefore unclear what the concept of chronozones now provides beyond what well-established archaeological and colloquial terminology already covers, perhaps apart from making us aware of these universal archaeological issues.  

Rather than being based on predefined discrete time intervals beyond the calendar scale, the analyses undertaken in the papers for this thesis largely rely on absolute dates from radiocarbon- and shoreline dates. These provide continuous longitudinal time-series data, with associated uncertainty. However, it is important to underscore that given the scarcity of radiocarbon dates, and the relative low resolution of shoreline dates, typological frameworks responsive to variation in material culture can most decidedly offer valuable chronological insights, even though this is not directly integrated in the studies undertaken here. Furthermore, while the analyses are done with dating methods that largely operate irrespective of archaeological periodisation, the results are frequently narratively and informally associated with general cultural developments believed to characterise the Stone Age of south-eastern Norway, as roughly outlined in Chapter 2. This is predominately done in an approximate manner with reference to what are best viewed as temporally and spatially fuzzy frameworks, based on the underlying logic that the frequent co-occurrence of various material expressions in time and space reflects some level of meaningful cultural cohesion. This also means that the term culture is used in a loose archaeological sense and is not presumed to equate to a unified, internally consistent unit in terms of language, genetics, or social structures [see e.g. @robert2011 for a thorough discussion of the culture term as used in archaeology].

A related avenue for critically engaging with the periodisation of the Norwegian Mesolithic was initially suggested by @bjerck2008, based on dividing the period into 500-year time-slices termed 'chronozones'. These were defined irrespective of typological developments, and were instead to roughly coincide with major environmental developments. The purpose of introducing this concept was to counteract the analytical complacency and uncritical reproduction of established cultural history that a cemented and undynamic typology can bring about. While this is certainly an important point, chronozones do not represent the best solution to this issue in my mind. First, a chronological framework independent of cultural developments is already available in form of the calendar scale, and simply describing developments within 500-year time intervals would seem to provide an adequate solution that does not necessitate the introduction of the complicating concept of chronozones. Secondly, chronozones have a vague connection to environmental developments that obviously do not occur within discrete units of 500 years. Furthermore, the relevance of these developments for human populations is at best unresolved. The benefit of typology is that it is entirely and clearly determined by developments in material culture, which we as archaeologists assume reflect meaningful cultural developments more generally. The benefit of the calendar scale is that it is entirely determined by, irrespective of what has otherwise transpired. Coupling these two dimensions would thus allows us to. The relevance of chronozones is unclear, and the use of the concept instead introduces vague  . While there might be issues with a typological framework, it is at least clear what it aims to represent. 

However, not extensively employing typological dating is likely to have led to loss in chronological precision, as the temporal resolution provided by means of shoreline dating can sometimes be of a precision below that of typology, dependent on the precise.
 In outlining a procedure for shoreline dating I have   

## Hunter-fisher-gatherers

Hunter-gatherers or foragers are useful but fuzzy and not unproblematic synonyms that are typically, but not exclusively, used to denote societies that have a subsistence-base that is for the most part not based on agricultural produce.  

Some expectations can be made on the bassi

## Palaeodemographic modelling
Palaeodemography or the study of temporal and spatial variation in the size and structure of past populations is a fundamental problem for archaeology [e.g. @shennan2001; @french2021]. This follows from the fact that demography is a determining factor in processes such as genetic diversification, social network structure and scaling, technological innovation and accumulation, as well as. As human culture is in large part determined by human interaction, 

One Known as the forager paradox. [@french2021, 4]
One of the implications of these findings is that the interpretation of archaeological proxies for population size is not as straightforward as one might immediately think. This in turn, needs to be kept in mind both when devising and comparing multiple population proxies, and in the construction of the narrative that builds on any numerical results.

Demographic modelling in early Holocene Fennoscandia has taken on a few different. In most recent years this is the SPD approach [@solheim2018; @solheim2020; @nielsen20; @jorgensen2020]. The SPD approach is based on summing the probability distribution associated with ^14^C-dates. However, there are a series of methodological and conceptual issues with this procedure, some of which have been dealt with and others which are integrated into the methodology and needs to be accounted for when interpreting any results.  

