# Concluding remarks

Any attempt at describing or explaining the past involves imposing abstractions that will necessarily hide variation and idiosyncrasies that could prove to be both important and interesting. Quantification is one system of representation that allows stringent comparability, reporting and handling of uncertainty, and analytical feasibility for large amounts of data across multiple analytical scales. Furthermore, the material that has been and continues to be generated by archaeology is getting increasingly vast, and any attempts at getting a basic overview, let alone draw inferences concerning past societal systems using these amounts of data, require frameworks designed to handle this flood of information. Consequently, at the cost of reducing the archaeological record to the logic of numbers, quantification offers the potential to yield insights that are simply not achievable by other means. 

@shennan1988[1] quotes Colin Renfrew has having stated that \'the days of the innumerate are numbered\'. However, Kristian Kristiansen [-@kristiansen2004, 80] later stated that quantitative methods were \'disastrously out of fashion\' in archaeology. This picture has changed considerably since 2004, and increased enthusiasm for such approaches need to be continuously tempered by a concern for the answers they can hope to answer, the nuances that they might subsume, and the intricacies involved with critically employing such methods in an informed manner. However, the potential of quantitative and computational approaches is arguably far from having being sufficiently utilised in Norwegian archaeology. 

This thesis has shown some of the advantages quantitative methods can have. Through the four papers of the thesis, focus has in part been directed towards exploring and deriving methods that can be used to meaningfully handle the increasingly massive material associated with the Norwegian Mesolithic. In one sense, therefore, the thesis can be considered to have contributed to fundamental descriptive tasks related to the overarching research question posed by in the introduction (see Section), concerned with mapping the data available to us and its quality as archaeological evidence. However, as has also been made clear through this synopsis, the elucidated patterns also have clear substantive implications as they are directly related to dimensions such as settlement patterns, mobility patterns and demographic developments, all of which have been heralded as fundamental for our understanding of past hunter-gatherer societies. 

The first two papers of the thesis were concerned with assessing, proposing and making available for use a new method for the shoreline dating of coastal Stone Age sites in the region, which was released as an R package free for anyone to employ. Chronological information is fundamental to archaeology, and so any method that can be drawn on to improve our control of when past events occurred is invaluable to the discipline. Furthermore, shoreline dating is especially important for Norwegian Mesolithic research given the generally poor preservation of organic material suitable for radiocarbon dating, and the vast amount of surveyed sites where other forms of temporal data is altogether limited or unavailable. However, as was made clear in the papers and this synopsis, the proposed method would benefit from a comprehensive suite of further exploration and independent testing of its applicability. Independent testing will be important for assessing the reliability of the method, and an extensions to other areas, inclusion of more data or other variables that might be relevant to the site-sea relationship could all reveal nuances that has implications for how the method could be adjusted for different contexts. Furthermore, given as the method is dependent on how people have utilised the coast, its applicability is directly related to a range of behavioural and societal dimensions. Elucidating such nuances therefore also stand to to improve our understanding of past coastal adaptation. 

As the code used for employing the proposed method for shoreline dating, and that used for its original development, is made freely available the approach can readily be extended to any area where geological control of past shoreline displacement is available. This will most immediately be relevant for other areas of Fennoscandia where shoreline dating has previously been applied, including large swathes of the coast of Norway [e.g. @bjerck2008], Finland [e.g. @tallavaara2020] and Sweden [e.g.]. However, the general principle of dating sites based on their distance to shifting shorelines could prove applicable to many areas of the world, including other regions with a continuous shoreline regression, such as parts of North America [@wren2020]. Extending the general principle to areas subjected to sea-level rise could also prove fruitful, as, at the very least, when a site location was inundated can be assumed to represent the latest possible use of the site thus potentially providing a *terminus ante quem* date.

The third paper of the thesis was concerned with exploring the composition of lithic assemblages using multivariate statistics to structure and help consistently scale an analysis of a larger number of lithic assemblages, each of which consists of a few hundred to several thousand artefacts. Apart from demonstrating some of the potential of using exploratory statistics in this manner, which has been done to a limited extent in Norwegian Mesolithic research, the analysis also identified some patterns that were given a substantive interpretation. These were that the proportion of secondarily worked lithics, the density of lithics and the proportion of non-flint material in the assemblages are indications of the kinds of mobility patterns associated with the deposition of the material. This  

The fourth and final paper of the thesis


<!-- The first two papers cntributed an assessment and development of a new method for shoreline dating coastal Stone Age sites in the region. The third paper employed exploratory multivariate statistics to assess a larger number of lithic inventories, each consisting of hundreds of artefacts, and explored variation in their composition over time. Finally, the method for shoreline dating was used to date a large number of sites within the study region and compared the derived summed probability of these dates to that of the summed probability of radiocarbon dates from within the same region.  -->
